## The Zero Value
- Go assigns a default *zero value* to any variable that is declared but not assigned a value.

## Literals
- A Go literal is an explicitly specified number, character, or string.
- Literals have default types, but you can use a literal to initialize other variables as long as they have a compatible type. For example, you can use an integer literal to initialize a float64 variable. This also applies to user defined types.

### Integer literal
- An integer literal a sequence of numbers. 
- Integer literals are base 10 by default. 
- Use prefixes to specify the base
	- binary => 0b
	- octal => 0o
	- hex => 0x
- You can put underscores (1_000_000)

### Floating-point literal
- A floating point number. Example: 69.420
- You can use `e` for exponents (4.02e10)
- You can write them in hex and also use `p` for exponent (0x12.34p5).

### Rune literal
- A character surrounded by single quotes
- You can use:
	- A single Unicode character (`'a'`)
	- 8-bit octal (`'\141'`)
	- 8-bit hex (`'\x61'`)
	- 16-bit hex (`'\u0061'`)
	- 32-bit Unicode (`'\U00000061'`)

### String literals
- Use double quotes to create an interpreted string literal (`"Hello and Goodbye"`).
- An interpreted string literal contain and interpret 1 or more rune literals.
- Use backquotes (\`) to create a raw string literal. Characters are included as is.

### Imaginary literals
- Use the `i` suffix to represent the imaginary portion of a complex number.

## Booleans

- Simple, `true` or `false`
- Zero value is `false`

## Numeric types

Go has 12 numeric types, grouped into 3 categories.

### Integer types
The default value for all of these is 0.

| Type name | Value range                                 |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| `int8`    | –128 to 127                                 |
| `int16`   | –32768 to 32767                             |
| `int32`   | –2147483648 to 2147483647                   |
| `int64`   | –9223372036854775808 to 9223372036854775807 |
| `uint8`   | 0 to 255                                    |
| `uint16`  | 0 to 65535                                  |
| `uint32`  | 0 to 4294967295                             |
| `uint64`  | 0 to 18446744073709551615                   |
#### Special integer types
- `byte` is an alias for `uint8`. Using `byte` is more common.
- `int` is can be a `int32` or an `int64` depending on the platform. 
	- Since it's not consistent, you cannot make operations between `int`, `int32` and `int64` without type conversion.
	- Integer literals default to `int`.
- `uint` behaves like `int` but unsigned.
- `rune` and `uintptr` are also names for integer types.

#### Choosing an integer type
- If you are working on something that requires a specific integer size, use the corresponding type (like binary file or a network protocol).
- If you are writing a library function that should work with any integer type, use a generic type.
- Default to using `int`.

> [!note]
> In older code, before generics where added you can find functions with the same functionality but slightly different names and different integer types (one uses int64 and the other uses uint64).
#### Integer operators
- The usual: +, -, \*, /, %.
- Dividing integers results in an integer.
- Divide by 0 causes a panic.
- The usual comparison operators and bit-maniputalion.

### Floating point types
Zero value is 0.

| Type name | Largest absolute value                         | Smallest (nonzero) absolute value              |
| --------- | ---------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| `float32` | 3.40282346638528859811704183484516925440e+38   | 1.401298464324817070923729583289916131280e-45  |
| `float64` | 1.797693134862315708145274237317043567981e+308 | 4.940656458412465441765687928682213723651e-324 |
- Floating-point literals default to float64.
- Unless you have a reason, use `float64`.
- Go uses the IEEE 754 specification.
- You cannot use `%`.
- `Floating-point/0` returns `+Inf` or `-Inf`.
- Dividing two floating point zeros (`0/0`) returns `NaN`.
- Don't compare 

>[!warning] Floating-point numbers are not precise
>Do not use them to represent money or other values that need an exact representation. Look at third party modules.

>[!warning] Don't compare floats with == and !=
>Define a maximum allowed variance (epsilon) and see if the difference between two floats is less than that.
>For more specific comparisons [click here](https://floating-point-gui.de/errors/comparison/)

### Complex types
- `complex64` uses `float32`
- `complex128` uses `float64`

## Intro to Strings and Runes

- The zero value of a string is an empty string.
- You can compare for equality and ordering using the comparison operators.
- You can concatenate with `+`.
- Strings are inmutable. You can reassing values to a string variable, but you cannot change the value of the assigned string.
- A single code point is a rune.
- More about this in [[3. Composite Types#Strings, Runes and Bytes]]

## Declaring variables

Using var:
```go
var x int = 10

var x = 10 // Uses the default type of the literal

var x int // initialize with zero value (0)

var a, b int = 10, 20 // Declare multiple variables with the same type

var x, y = 10, "hey" // Declare multiple variables with different types

var (
	a    int
	y    = 20
	z    int
	d, e = 30, "hey"
	f, g string
)
```

You declare and assign a variable using `:=` inside of functions:
```go
x := 10
a, b := 10, "hello"
```

### Which one to use?
- `:=` is the most common inside functions.
- If you want the zero value, use `var name type`
- If you don't want the default type of the literal, use `var` instead of type conversion.
	- Example: `var x byte = 20` > `x := byte(20)`

>[!tip]
>Avoid declaring variables outside of functions because they complicate data flow analysis. 

## Const

- Use `const` to declare inmutable values.
- `const` are limited.
- `const` is used to give names to literal values.
- A const can be assigned:
	- Numeric literals
	- Booleans
	- Strings
	- Runes
	- Values returned by the functions `complex`, `real`, `imag`, `len` and `cap`.
	- Expressions that consist of operators and the preceding values (??? no idea)
- Go constants do not use MACRO_CASE
### Typed and Untyped constants
- Untyped constants are more flexible. They can be assigned to variables with compatible types.
- Typed constants enforce the type usage. For example, `const x int = 10` cannot be assigned to `var y float64 = x`.

## Unused variables

- Every declared local variable must be read.
- Unused variables result in a compile-time error.
- Package-level variables do not count.
- Unused constants don't result in an error, but they are eliminated in the compiled binary.

