Go is designed to encourage best practices. Prefer composition over inheritance. 

## Types

- As seen before, you use the `type` keyword to declare user defined types, like structs of functions. You can also use primitives and compound types.
```go
type Score int
type Something func(string)Score
type TeamScores map[string]Score
```

## Methods

- Go supports methods on user-defined types. You declare a function like usual, but add a _receiver_ at the beginning. Usually, the receiver is a short abbreviation of the type's name, like the first letter. 
```go
type Person struct {
    FirstName string
    LastName  string
}

// receiver `p Person`
func (p Person) String() string {
    return fmt.Sprintf("%s %s", p.FirstName, p.LastName)
}
```

- Methods can only be declared at the package level. Normal functions can be declared inside any block.
- Methods and functions cannot be overloaded.
- Methods must be declared in the same package as the associated type.

### Pointer vs Value Receivers

- Receiver can be pointer receivers or value receivers.
- The following example will be used to explain some concepts:
```go
type Counter struct {
	total       int
	lastUpdated time.Time
}

func (c *Counter) Increment() {
	c.total++
	c.lastUpdated = time.Now()
}

func (c Counter) String() string {
	return fmt.Sprintf("total: %d, last updated: %v", c.total, c.lastUpdated)
}
```

- Which one to use?
	- If the method modifies the receiver, you must use a pointer receiver.
	- If the method handles `nil` instances, you must use a pointer receiver.
	- If the method does not modify the receiver, you can use a value receiver.
	- When a type has any pointer receiver methods, it is common to use pointer receivers for all methods.

- When a method is called, Go automatically converts the value to the necessary pointer or value. For example, if the method receives a pointer and you call the method from a value, the compiler changes it to a pointer. This applies in the opposite case.
```go
var c Counter
c.Increment() // Increment receives a pointer, so the compiler does `(&c).Increment()`

cPointer := &Counter{}
fmt.Println(c.String()) // String receives a value, so the compiler does `(*cPointer).String()`
```

- Careful with mixing pointer and value receivers, specially when working with functions. If you pass a value to a function and then call a pointer method, you will change the copy of the function, not the original value.
```go
func doUpdateWrong(c Counter) {
    c.Increment()
    fmt.Println("in doUpdateWrong:", c.String())
}

func doUpdateRight(c *Counter) {
    c.Increment()
    fmt.Println("in doUpdateRight:", c.String())
}

func main() {
    var c Counter
    doUpdateWrong(c)
    fmt.Println("in main:", c.String())
    doUpdateRight(&c)
    fmt.Println("in main:", c.String())
}
```

- Avoid writing getters and setters for Structs. It's simpler to just access the fields and use methods for business logic. An exception is when you need to update multiple fields in a single operation or when the update is not straightforward. 

### Handle `nil` instances

- Value receiver methods cannot called with `nil` (cannot dereference `nil`) and will panic in runtime.
- Pointer receiver methods can be called with `nil`, and sometimes it's simpler if the method can handle it.
```go
// Binary tree example
type IntTree struct {
    val         int
    left, right *IntTree
}


func (it *IntTree) Insert(val int) *IntTree {
	// Create a tree with the value if nil
	// This handles the base case of the algorithm
    if it == nil { 
        return &IntTree{val: val}
    }
    if val < it.val {
        it.left = it.left.Insert(val)
    } else if val > it.val {
        it.right = it.right.Insert(val)
    }
    return it
}
```

- Pointer receiver methods still receive a copy of the pointer, this means that you can’t write a pointer receiver method that handles `nil` and makes the original pointer non-nil. You need to return the new pointer.

- If the pointer receiver method won't work with `nil`, you can do nothing and let the code panic, or if it's recoverable you can check for `nil` and return an error.

### Method values
- Since methods are very similar to functions, you can assign them to variables:
```go
var c Counter
f := c.Increment
f() // Increments c
```
- This creates a _method value_, which is like a closure. In the previous example, `f` has access to `c`.

- You can also create a function from a method by calling `YourType.Method`. This is called a _method expression_.
```go
f2 := (*Counter).Increment
f2(&c) // Pass c 
```

### Functions vs Methods
- Not set in stone when you should use one or the other.
- In general, if the logic is closely related to a struct, or it feels natural to say that the operation is performed on the object/struct, it's probably good to use a method.
- When using interfaces, methods are necessary.
- If the logic depends only on input parameters, a function is good.

### Types are not inheritance
- You can declare types based on other types.
```go
type Score int
type HighScore Score

func printScore(s Score) {
	fmt.Println("The score is", s)
}

func main() {
	var s Score = 10
	printScore(s)

	var hs HighScore = 50
	printScore(hs) // Compile error

	var hs2 HighScore = s // Compile error, cannot assign Score to HighScore
	var hs3 HighScore = HighScore(s) // Using type conversion works.
}
```

- Declaring types with other types does not create a hierarchy. There is no inheritance.
- You cannot assign values between them, even tho the underlying type is the same (int).
- If the type does not match, you cannot pass the value to the function.

### Types are documentation
- It's not clear at first glance when to declare types based on other built-in or user-defined types.
- These types should exist to make the code clearer.
- "When you have the same underlying data, but different sets of operations to perform, make two types. Declaring one as being based on the other avoids some repetition and makes it clear that the two types are related."
- The type `ApiKey` is clearer than `string`, or `Percentaje` and `int`.

## Iota
- Go does not have enumerations, but it does have `iota`, which lets you assign a increasing value to a set of constants.
- First, declare a type based on `int`.
```go
type MailCategory int
```
- Second, use a `const` block to define a set of values.
```go
const (
	Uncategorized  MailCategory = iota // 0
	Personal                           // 1
	Spam                               // 2
	Social                             // 3
	Advertisements                     // 4
)
```
- Constants with no type or assignment copy the literal expression of the previous line with a type or assignment.
- This results in each constant being assign an increasing integer value, starting from 0 for `Uncategorized`, and ending with 4 for `Advertisements`.

- `iota` is reset back to 0 each time a `const` block is created.
- The value of `iota` increases by one for each value in the `const` block, even if it's being used intermittently in the block.
```go
const (
    Field1 = 0        // 0
    Field2 = 1 + iota // 2
    Field3 = 20       // 20
    Field4            // 20
    Field5            // 20
    Field6 = iota     // 5
)
```

- In `Field2` and `Field6` the value of `iota` is 1 and 5 respectively, since they are the second and fifth elements of the block.
- Since `Field4` and `Field5` do not have a type or assignment, they copy the value of the previous line with a type or assignment (`Field3`).

>[!warning] Dangers of iota
>- Adding a new value in the middle of a const block renumbers subsequent values. This could cause subtle bugs if other systems care about the value, like an API or database.
>- `iota`-based enums should be used when you don't care about the value itself, you only need a set of names with different values.
>- If the actual value matters, specify it explicitly.

- As mentioned previously, the compiler can copy the previous literal expression in a constant block. This makes it possible to make examples like this:
```go
type BitField int

const (
	Field1 BitField = 1 << iota // 1
	Field2                      // 2
	Field3                      // 4
	Field4                      // 8
)
```
- This type of implementation is clever, but usually not recommended. If used, document it clearly.

### Embeddings
- You can _embed_ types as fields in a struct. Fields and methods declared on the embedded field are _promoted_ to the containing struct and can be invoked directly on it.
```go
type Employee struct {
	Name string
	ID   string
}

func (e Employee) String() string {
	return fmt.Sprintf("%s (%s)", e.Name, e.ID)
}

type Manager struct {
	Employee // Embedded field Employee
	Reports []Employee
}

func main() {
	m := Manager{
		Employee: Employee{
			Name: "Gorb",
			ID:   "45678",
		},
		Reports: []Employee{},
	}

	fmt.Println("ID", m.ID) // Able to access the fields of Employee directly
	fmt.Println(m.String()) // Able to use the methods of Employee
}
```

- Embeddings are Go's built-in support for Composition.

- If an embedded field has fields or methods with the same name as the containing struct, you can still access them:
```go
type Inner struct {
	X int
}

type Outer struct {
	Inner
	X int
}

func main() {
	o := Outer{
		Inner: Inner{
			X: 42,
		},
		X: 24,
	}

	fmt.Println(o.X)
	fmt.Println(o.Inner.X)
}
```

### Embedding is not inheritance
- Don't try to understand embeddings as inheritance.
- You cannot assign variables of different types to each other, even when embeddings are being used.
- The embedded field has no knowledge about the containing struct. This applies to methods of the embedded field. There is no dynamic dispatch in this type of scenarios.
```go
func (i Inner) IntPrinter(val int) string {
	return fmt.Sprintf("Inner IntPrinter: %d", val)
}

func (i Inner) DoublePrinter() string {
	return i.IntPrinter(i.X * 2)
}

func (o Outer) IntPrinter(val int) string {
	return fmt.Sprintf("Outer IntPrinter: %d", val)
}

o := Outer{
	Inner: Inner{
		X: 325,
	},
	X: 2,
}

fmt.Println(o.DoublePrinter()) // This will print 650
```

## Interfaces: Introduction
- Interfaces are the only abstract type 
- To declare an interface you use the `type` keyword and an interface literal where you list all methods that must be implemented by a concrete type to "meet" the interface. 
```go
// Stringer interface defined in the fmt package.
// type Stringer interface {
// 	String() string
// }

type Counter struct {
	total       int
	lastUpdated time.Time
}

// Meets the interface
func (c Counter) String() string {
	return fmt.Sprintf("%d, %v", c.total, c.lastUpdated)
}

func main() {
	var myStringer fmt.Stringer
	myStringer = Counter{}
}
```

- Interface names usually end with the `er` suffix. Other examples are: `io.Reader`, `io.Closer`, `json.Marshaler` and `http.Handler`.
### Method sets
- Methods defined in by an interface are called the _method set_ of the interface.
- Pointer instances and value instances have their own method sets. The method set of an instance has to contain the method set of an interface to meet it.
	- Value instances only have value receiver methods in their method set.
	- Pointer instances have both value and pointer receiver methods in their method sets.

- To understand this concept better, lets go through an example:
```go
type Incrementer interface {
	Increment()
}

// Pointer receiver
func (c *Counter) Increment() {
	c.total++
	c.lastUpdated = time.Now()
}

var myIncrementer Incrementer
myIncrementer = &Counter{} // Works
myIncrementer = Counter{}  // Compile-time error
```
- `Counter` meets the `Incrementer` interface with a pointer receiver. This means that only pointer instances have `Increment` in their method set. Since a value instance does not have `Increment` in the method set, they cannot be assigned to `myIncrementer`. Only pointer instances can be assigned to a variable of type `Incrementer`.

### Type-Safe Duck Typing
- Interfaces are common in other languages, but in Go they are implemented implicitly. There is no explicit way to say that a type meets an interface, you just implement the methods.
- Dynamically typed languages usually use _duck typing_ instead of interfaces. This means that you can pass any instance as long as the instance implements a method with the same name and parameters.
- Statically typed languages like Java need you to specify that a class is implementing the interface. This makes it an explicit dependency.
- Using standard interfaces  encourages the _decorator_ pattern. It is common to write factory functions that take in an instance of an interface and return another type that implements the same interface.

### Embedded Interfaces
- You can embed interfaces inside of interfaces.
```go
type Reader interface {
	Read(p []byte) (n int, err error)
}

type Closer interface {
	Close() error
}

type ReadCloser interface {
	Reader
	Closer
}
```

### Accept Interfaces, Return Structs
- Common phrase in the Go community "accept interfaces, return structs"
- Functions that accept interfaces become more flexible and declare the type of functionality thats being used.
- Meanwhile, returning concrete types makes it easier to update the functions return value. You can add new fields and methods to a struct, but you cannot add more methods to an interface without breaking functionality. 
- Sometimes, returning an interface is a decent option. For example, a parser can return many types of tokens, in this case returning an interface would make sense.
- Errors are an exception to the rule. Functions and methods that return errors use the `error` interface.

#### Performance
- Calling a function with interface parameters need a memory allocation for each interface parameter, which means more work for the garbage collector. 
- Always write the program to be readable and maintainable first.
- If your program is slow _and_ while using a profiler you can determine that the issue is an interface parameter, you could rewrite it to use a concrete type.
- This is a trade-off between better performance and better abstractions.

### Nil
- `nil` is used to represent the zero value for interfaces, but in reality it's a bit less simple.
```go
var pointer *Counter
fmt.Println(pointer == nil) // prints true
var i Incrementer
fmt.Println(i == nil) // prints true
i = pointerCounter
fmt.Println(i == nil) // prints false
```
- An interface is implemented as a struct with 2 pointers, one for the value and one for the type. If the type is `nil`, the interface is nil. If the type is non-nil, the interface is non-nil, even if the value is `nil`.

- You cannot call methods on a `nil` interface (the program panics), but you can call methods on an interface with an assigned `nil` concrete instance.

- When the interface is non-nil, it can be hard to determine if the associated value is `nil`. To find out you must use reflection.

### Compare interfaces
- You can check if two interfaces are equal using `==`.
- Two interface instances are equal if both the type and value are equal.
- Comparing interface instances could result in `true`, `false` or a panic. Cases
	- If the types don't match, `false` 
	- If the types match and the values are comparable, `true` or `false`
	- If the types match and the values are not comparable, panic.

- There is no way to specify that an interface can only be implemented with comparable types.
- Exercise caution when comparing interfaces. To be extra safe, use reflection to inspect an interface before comparing it.

- This also applies to `map` keys. You can assign interface types to a map keys. Keys must be comparable, so by adding an interface instance with an incomparable type, you can cause a panic.

### The empty interfaces or `any`
- In Go you can create variables that can store a value of any type by using the empty interface `interface{}`.
- As of Go 1.18, `any` is an alias to `interface{}`. 
- An empty interface represents a type that implements zero or more methods, which matches every type in Go.
- An empty interface tells you nothing about the value, so you can't do much with it.
- When using `any` you will likely use reflection to write and read the value.

>[!warning] Avoid using `any` when possible.

### Type Assertions

- Type assertions allow you to get the underlying concrete type or another interface using the syntax `interfaceInstance.(type)`
```go
type MyInt int

func main() {
	var a any
	var mi MyInt = 100

	a = mi

	// Matches the underlying type. Works.
	b := a.(MyInt)
	fmt.Println(b + 20)

	// Code panics
	c := a.(string)
	fmt.Print(c)

	// Code panics
	d := a.(int)
	fmt.Println(d)
}
```
- The type assertion must match the underlying type. If the type assertion fails, the program panics.
- You can avoid a panic by using [[3. Composite Types#The comma ok Idiom|the comma ok idiom]]:
```go
e, ok := a.(bool)
if !ok {
	fmt.Println("The underlying type of `a` is not a bool")
}
```
- If `ok` is false, the variable is set to its zero value

>[!info] Assertion != Conversion
>A type conversion changes a value to a new type. Most type conversions are checked at compile-time. Type conversions can be used for concrete types and interfaces.
>
>A type assertion reveals the type of a value stored in an interface. All type assertions are checked at runtime. Type assertions can only be used with interfaces.

>[!warning] Always use the comma ok idiom when doing assertions

### Type switches
- When an interface could be one of multiple possible values, use a type switch.
```go
func doThings(i any) {
    switch j := i.(type) {
    case nil:
        // i is nil, type of j is any
    case int:
        // j is of type int
    case MyInt:
        // j is of type MyInt
    case io.Reader:
        // j is of type io.Reader
    case string:
        // j is a string
    case bool, rune:
        // i is either a bool or rune, so j is of type any
    default:
        // no idea what i is, so j is of type any
    }
}
```
 - The type of the switch variable `j` depends on the case. It could be `any`, a concrete type or an interface.
	 - If you list more than one type, `j` is of type `any`.
	 - If `nil`, `j` is of type `any`
	 -  If nothing matches and you have a default case, `j` is of type `any`
	 - If you match a single type, `j` is of that type.

>[!tip]
>It's common to name a type switch variable with the same name as the interface `switch i := i.(type)`. This is one of the few cases where shadowing is used.

- Type switches can be used with all interface types, not just the empty interface.

### Use Type switches/assertions sparingly
- Usually, parameters and return values should be used as the specified type instead of what they could be underneath. Using type switches/assertions means that the functions API is not accurately expressing what it needs to work.
- However, type switches/assertions are useful in some cases.
- A common use of type assertions is to check if a variable implements another interface. This allows you to specify optional interfaces. Example:
```go
// copyBuffer is the actual implementation of Copy and CopyBuffer.
// if buf is nil, one is allocated.
func copyBuffer(dst Writer, src Reader, buf []byte) (written int64, err error) {
    // If the reader has a WriteTo method, use it to do the copy.
    // Avoids an allocation and a copy.
    if wt, ok := src.(WriterTo); ok {
        return wt.WriteTo(dst)
    }
    // Similarly, if the writer has a ReadFrom method, use it to do the copy.
    if rt, ok := dst.(ReaderFrom); ok {
        return rt.ReadFrom(src)
    }
    // function continues...
}
```

### Optional interfaces don't work with the decorator pattern
- The "optional interfaces" strategy has one drawback. It is common to use the decorator pattern to wrap implementations of the same interface and layer behavior. When an optional interface is wrapped, it cannot be detected with type assertions/switches.
- The same problem occurs with errors. Errors can wrap other errors to include more information. Type assertions cannot detect wrapped errors. You can use `errors.Is` and `errors.As`

### Interfaces with function types
- Go allows methods on any user-defined type, including function types. This means that you can define 